# Data Manipulation Language (DML) includes operations such as INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE:

## Basics

```sql
-- Create a table HelloWorld
CREATE TABLE HelloWorld (
 Id INT IDENTITY,
 Description VARCHAR(1000)
)
-- DML Operation INSERT, inserting a row into the table
INSERT INTO HelloWorld (Description) VALUES ('Hello World')
-- DML Operation SELECT, displaying the table
SELECT * FROM HelloWorld
-- Select a specific column from table
SELECT Description FROM HelloWorld
-- Display number of records in the table
SELECT Count(*) FROM HelloWorld
-- DML Operation UPDATE, updating a specific row in the table
UPDATE HelloWorld SET Description = 'Hello, World!' WHERE Id = 1
-- Selecting rows from the table (see how the Description has changed after the update?)
SELECT * FROM HelloWorld
-- DML Operation - DELETE, deleting a row from the table
DELETE FROM HelloWorld WHERE Id = 1
-- Selecting the table. See table content after DELETE operation
SELECT * FROM HelloWorld
```

<br>
<hr>
<br>

## Query tables example

```sql
USE Northwind;
GO
SELECT TOP 10 * FROM Customers
ORDER BY CompanyName
-- will select the first 10 records of the Customer table, ordered by the column CompanyName from the database Northwind
```

Note that Use Northwind; changes the default database for all subsequent queries. You can still reference the database by using the fully qualified syntax in the form of [Database].[Schema].[Table]:
```sql
SELECT TOP 10 * FROM Northwind.dbo.Customers
ORDER BY CompanyName
SELECT TOP 10 * FROM Pubs.dbo.Authors
ORDER BY City
```
This is useful if you're querying data from different databases. Note that dbo, specified "in between" is called a
schema and needs to be specified while using the fully qualified syntax. You can think of it as a folder within your
database. dbo is the default schema. The default schema may be omitted. All other user defined schemas need to
be specified.

<br>
<hr>
<br>

### Reserved words

If the database table contains columns which are named like reserved words, e.g. Date, you need to enclose the
column name in brackets, like this:
```sql
-- descending order
SELECT TOP 10 [Date] FROM dbo.MyLogTable
ORDER BY [Date] DESC
```
<br>
The same applies if the column name contains spaces in its name (which is not recommended). An alternative
syntax is to use double quotes instead of square brackets, e.g.:

```sql 
-- descending order
SELECT top 10 "Date" from dbo.MyLogTable
order by "Date" desc
```
- is equivalent but not so commonly used. Notice the difference between double quotes and single quotes: <strong>Single quotes are used for strings</strong>

<br>
<hr>
<br>

 Notice that T-SQL has a N prefix for NChar and NVarchar data types

 ```sql
SELECT TOP 10 * FROM Northwind.dbo.Customers
WHERE CompanyName LIKE N'AL%'
ORDER BY CompanyName
 ```

- returns all companies having a company name starting with AL (% is a wild card, use it as you would use the asterisk in a DOS command line, e.g. DIR AL*). For LIKE, there are a couple of wildcards available

<br>
<hr>
<br>

## Joins
Joins are useful if you want to query fields which don't exist in one single table, but in multiple tables. For example:
You want to query all columns from the Region table in the Northwind database. But you notice that you require
also the RegionDescription, which is stored in a different table, Region. However, there is a common key, RgionID
which you can use to combine this information in a single query as follows (Top 5 just returns the first 5 rows, omit
it to get all rows):

```sql
SELECT TOP 5 Territories.*,
 Regions.RegionDescription
FROM Territories
INNER JOIN Region
 ON Territories.RegionID=Region.RegionID
ORDER BY TerritoryDescription
```
- will show all columns from Territories plus the RegionDescription column from Region. The result is ordered by TerritoryDescription

<br>
<hr>
<br>

## Table Aliases

When your query requires a reference to two or more tables, you may find it useful to use a Table Alias. Table
aliases are shorthand references to tables that can be used in place of a full table name, and can reduce typing and
editing. The syntax for using an alias is:

```
<TableName> [as] <alias>
```

- Where as is an optional keyword. For example, the previous query can be rewritten as:

```sql
SELECT TOP 5 t.*,
 r.RegionDescription
FROM Territories t
INNER JOIN Region r
 ON t.RegionID = r.RegionID
ORDER BY TerritoryDescription
```
<hr>
Aliases must be unique for all tables in a query, even if you use the same table twice. For example, if your Employee table included a SupervisorId fiel, you can use this query to return an employee and his supervisor's name:

```sql
SELECT e.*,
s.Name as SupervisorName -- Rename the field for output
FROM Employee e
INNER JOIN Employee s
ON e.SupervisorId = s.EmployeeId
WHERE e.EmployeeId = 111
```

<br>
<hr>
<br>

## Unions

As we have seen before, a Join adds columns from different table sources. But what if you want to combine rows
from different sources? In this case you can use a UNION. Suppose you're planning a party and want to invite not
only employees but also the customers. Then you could run this query to do it:

```sql
SELECT FirstName+' '+LastName as ContactName, Address, City FROM Employees
UNION
SELECT ContactName, Address, City FROM Customers
```

- It will return names, addresses and cities from the employees and customers in one single table. Note that
duplicate rows (if there should be any) are automatically eliminated (if you don't want this, use a UNION ALL
instead). The column number, column names, order and data type must match across all the select statements that
are part of the union - this is why the first SELECT combines FirstName and LastName from Employee into
ContactName.

<br>
<hr>
<br>

## Table Variables

It can be useful, if you need to deal with temporary data (especially in a stored procedure), to use table variables: The difference between a "real" table and a table variable is that it just exists in memory for temporary processing.

```sql
DECLARE @Region TABLE
(
 RegionID int,
 RegionDescription NChar(50)
)
```

- creates a table in memory. In this case the @ prefix is mandatory because it is a variable. You can perform all DML
operations mentioned above to insert, delete and select rows

```sql
INSERT INTO @Region values(3,'Northern')
INSERT INTO @Region values(4,'Southern')
```
<hr>

But normally, you would populate it based on a real table like

```sql
INSERT INTO @Region
SELECT * FROM dbo.Region WHERE RegionID>2;
```

which would read the filtered values from the real table dbo.Region and insert it into the memory table @Region -
where it can be used for further processing. For example, you could use it in a join like

```sql
SELECT * FROM Territories t
JOIN @Region r on t.RegionID=r.RegionID
```
- which would in this case return all Northern and Southern territories.

