```sql
SELECT * INTO NewTable FROM OldTable
```
Creates a new table with structure of old table and inserts all rows into the new table

<hr>

## Some Restrictions
1. You cannot specify a table variable or table-valued parameter as the new table.
2. You cannot use SELECT…INTO to create a partitioned table, even when the source table is
partitioned. SELECT...INTO does not use the partition scheme of the source table; instead, the new
table is created in the default filegroup. To insert rows into a partitioned table, you must first
create the partitioned table and then use the INSERT INTO...SELECT FROM statement.
3. Indexes, constraints, and triggers defined in the source table are not transferred to the new table,
GoalKicker.com – Microsoft® SQL Server® Notes for Professionals 10
nor can they be specified in the SELECT...INTO statement. If these objects are required, you can
create them after executing the SELECT...INTO statement.
4. Specifying an ORDER BY clause does not guarantee the rows are inserted in the specified order.
When a sparse column is included in the select list, the sparse column property does not transfer
to the column in the new table. If this property is required in the new table, alter the column
definition after executing the SELECT...INTO statement to include this property.
5. When a computed column is included in the select list, the corresponding column in the new table
is not a computed column. The values in the new column are the values that were computed at the
time SELECT...INTO was executed.
